Hello and welcome to the 15th webcast from Padmasami Ling. This is a PBC morning dawn study group,
and today we'll be talking about the Venerable Khevelopo Che's book, the Buddhist Path, Chapter 15,
and it's called Ngondro Practice. So thanks a lot for joining. We'll begin with our usual opening
prayers,
and then we'll go into the discussion. So thank you very much.
[Singing in Dzogchen]
[Singing]
In the palace of the old man Dhammadattu, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times,
the one who shows clearly the Dhammakaya of my own mind, we praise to the honorable Vrutkuru,
the glorious Vrut teacher, precious one, dwelling on the lotus seat on the crown of my head.
Hold me with your great kindness and bestow the accomplishments of bodhi's speech and mind.
[Singing]
Thanks. So we'll begin in the Buddhist Path, Chapter 15, and Ngondro Practice, which is on page 77,
and then I'll briefly just summarize the first half of the chapter, which is really short,
and then we'll go into our main topics we're discussing today.
So the first paragraph of the Venerable Kemperomache says that the Ngondro, or the foundational
practices,
are the preliminary practices of the Vatrayana.
Great masters like Guru Padmasambhava extracted these essential teachings of the Sutras and the
Tantras
and condensed them into the Ngondro, these practices that we're going to discuss.
The Ngondro means that which goes before. So looking at this meaning in a larger way,
the Ngondro practices go before because they must be done before we complete enlightenment,
before we become enlightened.
The Ngondro itself has several parts.
The first section Rinpoche has discussed is the first thoughts that turn the mind away from samsara
and towards nirvana or enlightenment, and these include the four points.
The first is our preciousness of our current situation.
The second is impermanence of all conditioned existence.
Third is the infallibility of cause and effect, or karma.
And fourth is the futility and the dissatisfaction of doing negative actions
and the inevitable experience of negative results from those actions, so samsara.
Then the second section of Ngondro practice is taking refuge in the three jewels of the Buddha
Dharma and Sangha
and the three roots of Guru Deva and Dakini in the Vatrayana level of the Buddha Shakyamuni's
teachings.
Then the third section of Ngondro is developing bodhichitta,
which is caring more for others than for one's own self,
and wishing and working to help all beings become enlightened by oneself becoming enlightened.
Then the fourth section is called mandala offering,
which is a principle practice to accumulate a vast amount of merit and wisdom.
And then fifthly is the Vajrasattva practice to purify our negative actions and the obscurations of
our mind.
Then the sixth section is the guru yoga practice,
which Rinpoche says is exceptionally important to receive the blessings of the guru
and all the lineage masters and gurus and bodhisattvas,
and then mingling their wisdom and separately with our own awareness.
So these are the six main sections of any Ngondro practice.
And then the Rinpoche's then go on to say that an important part of Ngondro practice is prostr
ations,
which particularly are aimed at removing obscurations of our body and releasing the knots in our
channels.
And they say that you can do prostrations traditionally while reciting the refuge prayers
or while saying this Bhajra Guru mantra of Guru Padmasambhava in the guru yoga section.
Yeah, people will go, that's more or less the first section of the chapter,
then maybe Lodra if you read that first main point and discuss.
Oh sure. So on page 77, the first paragraph reads,
"The Ngondro practices are the preliminary practices of the Vajrayana.
The usual approach in Tibet is to start formal practice with Ngondro,
and while doing Ngondro, you also do Sanatana Vipashana as part of Ngondro.
In all Vajrayana practices, after the main part of the practice,
there is a concluding section of Shammatam Vipashana.
These are done according to the type of meditation you are doing,
instructions of your teacher, and your level of accomplishment.
Previous great masters like Guru Padmasambhava extracted the essential teachings
of the sutras and tantras and condensed them into the Ngondro.
The Ngondro is a compound word in Tibetan made up of none, which means before,
and dro, which means to go. Together they mean that which goes before, or preliminary.
Looking at the meaning in a larger way, the Ngondro practices go before
because they must be done before reaching enlightenment.
If these practices go first, then enlightenment will follow.
Many people translate Ngondro as preliminary because these are the first set of Vajrayana practices
.
Ngondro is used to establish a firm foundation for further realization.
Well, if I may, after you're lively reading Ngondro, thank you.
Oh, thank you.
What strikes me most there, personally, is the whole concept of it going before.
Other people here know more about Chamathana, the text of meditation.
But I was just thinking that what's rich about it, I suppose,
is that you're meditating and practicing meditation as a beginner, as we all are,
but that it's something that opens the path and kind of opening a space
so you're actually heading in a direction with it.
You're not just sort of blankly directionless.
It's something that's why I experience it.
There's something sort of opening the path, like I feel helpers going out there
and opening space for me, so I'm actually going to go somewhere a bit different.
It's not just going to be sitting here with me in a blank, or kind of in the same place.
That's what strikes me.
But also what also strikes me is that the text says that the Tibetan masters condensed them in Ng
ondro.
What is it? All the sutras and all the... - All the sutras. - And all the tantras.
So that's a lot. That's a lot.
More than I'll ever have a chance to touch, so I'm very glad someone condensed it for me.
Really, like, honestly, seriously.
We just received a lot of some teachings here.
We were very lucky from Rupuche, from Kampur Rupuche.
I'm very grateful for them. He was very kind. He taught a lot about Ngondro and the rest of the
teachings.
And some of the sections struck me particularly, you know, as perhaps parts of condensed sections
that I hadn't gotten before. I was like, "Oh, that's me, the Ngondro."
And I was wondering, just personally, if you want to answer personally,
what struck you in those teachings and what struck you most about Ngondro,
the teachings we all just shared in the last month?
It seems like they keep... Kimbo, at least, he keeps going back to Ngondro being something you just
keep doing.
And it's interesting that they even explicitly... I mean, it makes sense.
They would say that it is preliminary, but at the same time, it's just...
Kimbo keeps saying also how it's not just preliminary.
It's a preserve, or it's like the stabilizer of everything else we do, it seems like.
I know he talks about it being the launch path, you know?
Oh, yeah, that's a nice thing.
It's kind of like the second paragraph, that last sentence of both those first paragraphs
in a way seems related to what you're talking about.
The end of the last paragraph is just saying how Ngondro is establishing a firm foundation for our
realization.
And then that last sentence in the first paragraph is saying that Ngondro is done
according to the type of meditation you're doing, the instructions of your teacher and the level of
accomplishment.
So in a way, when I was reading, especially that line, it really kind of in a way...
it alludes to that part of Ngondro, how it really is... it is the complete path.
There's nothing missing in the Ngondro.
And that aspect, how it is... it's everything... the whole package is right there.
Because the more we spend our time familiarizing ourselves with all these aspects,
then, you know, and the more we keep that with our joy and devotion and all those ingredients,
then the deeper and deeper and more full the realization comes.
And how it applies every single step of the path to Ngondro,
it seems like those sentences kind of bring out that point.
But Ngondro did what you were going to say.
Oh, you did? Oh, wow.
Oh, I was looking at... for those who have the study guide to it also,
if you look down in the Vajrayana, one of the things that also struck me
was when I was looking through the foundational elements of Vajrayana practice,
they talk about that vast sincere motivation of bodhicitta.
And of course, I mean, there's... Ngondro has the whole section of bodhicitta.
But also, when it goes into that purity or understanding of the view, you know, the nature,
how much of that really comes out of not only the renunciations that really start to soften your
heart
and soften your heart not only to, you know, being able to be more perceptive to the view,
but also soften your heart in that way you're able to be more perceptive and compassionate towards
others.
So you have that essence. Then there's the refuge where you're really starting to sink down into
that aspect,
you know, into that softness and really, you know, have that trust and teaching.
And then it, you know, blends into bodhicitta where it's that vast compassion,
that motivation that they're talking about, the foundation.
And then, again, when you start going into like the mandala and Vajrasattva,
again, you know, you're purifying the view, you're accumulating that wisdom,
you're really just clearing away all that clutter.
And then the guru yoga there, right there, you know, all of those blessings that really do just
make that view.
So maybe personal is not really the right word, but it does give it that very intimate, I don't
know,
but that, you know, it's there. It's very tangible.
And then, you know, going into the Amitabha practice and the dedication,
particularly the dedication of Arichu's too, it's easy to see there how, you know, just that,
it touches back into that bodhicitta, again, that motivation for others, that giving away, you know
,
we do all these beautiful practices and, you know, have that real tangible, beautiful, you know,
qualities just kind of really glorify and pop. And then now it's like, okay, this isn't for me, you
know.
So in that sense, it's really beautiful, how it's, I mean, you start to, the more you look at,
the more you see the different ways that it is the foundation, you know, it's, you know,
particularly the way they talk about preliminary and the way that it's not so much just before,
as much as preliminary to enlightenment. All practice is preliminary to enlightenment, you know, in
that way.
The third thing what you're saying is your sense of it being a whole that's really wonderfully tied
together,
and holding it so nicely and holding it up the whole thing together, but just quickly, in case it
sparks anyone else,
what I found listening this time is that there's a piece I hadn't been doing, the mandala offering.
Oh, with the father, I haven't got all the pieces together, whatever, you know, I can do this while
I'm on the bus,
but I can't try this when I'm on the bus, etc., right? So I felt a little, but I haven't really sat
with it much,
I'm not going to stop for the rest much, but mandala specifically, I haven't done.
Listening to what Kemper was saying about it this time really settled something for me,
and I just did it a little bit, you know, my hand walking around between teachings,
and I was really surprised because, you know, it had a real effect on me.
Suddenly, the way he puts it is that it's offering up, or pulling together, opening the door of
infinite luxuries,
opening the door of infinite luxuries and offering them on different levels,
you know, on the things that are, and on the level of one's own experience of those things,
and then on an even vaster level, and that can be read in many different ways, or experienced in
different ways,
but I hadn't actually sat there and pulled all those things and offered them all together all at
once,
and when I did, it sort of said, "Oh, I'm actually kind of right here, like it is, like I can fit
all those things in,
and it's all happening right here," and that made a big difference for me in how I experience,
or anticipate experiencing, the rest of the mandala.
So you're saying it's really a whole, it's all tied together, and that the pieces feed each other,
really, you know, makes sense to me, even though, right now, I noticed that recently.
Wonderful!
Yeah, I'm sure other people got something specific, kind of.
I mean, I got something like, kind of like what you guys were all saying,
and what Dylan mentioned, that he said, "We keep doing it."
Yeah.
Like, we don't just do nothing to get through it, to get the accumulation,
"I got five, I got five hundred thousand, I'm done," or, "Okay, I did..."
You know, of course, there's definitely that sense, like, "I have to do a hundred thousand
frustrations."
It's just like, that's a number, you know?
But if you don't do any of those with mindfulness, if you don't do any of those with awareness,
or like Lai said, following the instructions, opening your hearts with a practice,
understanding why you're doing it, really connecting with the lineage and with the teachings,
while you're doing it, as much as you can.
Because otherwise, it's kind of like, "Who cares if you're doing Andro?"
You know, like, if you do it routine, without thinking about it, to get it done,
and you didn't transform your mind, and your heart didn't open anymore,
it's just like, it's no big difference.
Yeah, that's great.
The point of all Dharma practices, transform the mind, you know how it patterns.
I mean, I personally got a lot from his book, not about, not for happiness,
and he really mentions that.
He's like, oftentimes, you know, we wake up, go through the practice mechanically,
don't really even think or connect with the aspiration of prayers,
and he's like, "Our result is small," you know?
Because we don't, we're not doing the practice.
I'm not saying it, we're not doing it.
But Rinpoche said, he's like, "Patra Rinpoche, he did Mundo 23 times, or 25 times, or 27 times."
"Sankhapa, during one retreat, he did 3,800,000 prostrations during one four-year retreat."
So it's like, and these are masters of the highest degree.
I mean, nobody knew exactly what Patra Rinpoche's main practice was,
but everybody thought it was Andro, because whenever they heard him,
he was during Mundo practice, in the prayers and refuge, in Atisha,
one of the greatest masters ever in Tibet.
They called him, they said, after a while, someone said,
"Oh, you had the refuge lama," and referred to him like that.
He said, "Refuge lama? What's that? Oh, that's you!
Everyone calls you refuge lama because you teach on refuge all the time, so much."
And he was like, "Oh, really? Oh, I'm so happy, you know? That's so wonderful."
Because he felt so joyful. He was like, "If people connect with just the refuge,
they're totally clear. All their path to enlightenment will be just totally clear."
So anyway, that heartfelt, you know, like, really connecting with it as much as we can.
Of course, moving along and keep going, not getting caught up in, but that's just...
It's not so rich because it's experiential.
Like, I'm just thinking of refuge.
The first time, Lai, you were here when I... I think I probably said it to you.
When I first did prostrations... I mean, I've never heard of anything like this before,
but anyway, I was here, so I liked some prostrations.
I was kind of amazed. I said, "Oh, my gosh!"
I said, "You know, I'm a girl, and, you know, I have a professional staff."
I said, "So I'm used to holding myself up, and, you know, make a trail look good,
and, you know, whatever, all the time."
Upright, right? You know, ready.
And here I did. I sort of put myself on the floor, right?
My face right in the floor, and I, like, I could get up again. I was okay.
And it was just this feeling of, "Oh, that really felt kind of good to put myself down like that
and not have to worry about it and just, like, lie down."
And so there was this sense of, "Oh, wow, I can just put myself down,
and, like, I'm going to survive. I'm not going to die.
But I can just put myself down. I don't have to be holding myself up like this."
So, and even, you know, beyond that, I'm now thinking that I think those movements,
you know, you go down, and you have a certain prayer you sang with it,
and depending on the level of the prayer and how the instructions you've received,
it sinks in a different way.
You're like this, and then you go down, and you're sang a certain line as you spread out,
and you do this, and then you come up, sang another line, and all this is, you know,
almost like doing sports. You do sports.
The fact that you're kinesthetically doing something linked to a certain thought
or a certain line, you know, the thought, you have your sang a line,
in fact, you link those pieces together, eventually it can start, "Whoa, I kind of got something
there.
I think I'm on a path. I think I'm on a track.
I think it's opened and went before, opened away from me."
Oh, wow, you know, you're linking sound and movement and lineage blessings
and the lines of the prayer and your brain.
It's a body, speech, mind.
Working together to take you places, you didn't know you were going to go with that.
Yeah, you find a humility out of nowhere.
Different things, wherever you're meant to go on that path,
it'll open it for you because you're just doing all this stuff together.
You don't know how to make it.
And someone goes, "Wow, okay, that's interesting."
That's why I think it's so personal, too.
Once we start doing it and we start with the real attention or really opening the heart,
I just notice everyone I talk to, they have sort of like a slightly different way
of doing every practice as opposed to your own practice.
I love that. It's like you really practice, you really open your heart.
You're going to find more ways the more you open up.
I don't know. It's just not that beautiful.
Yeah, go ahead and speak in sports.
Well, maybe in sports there's no prayer. That could be part of the problem.
Not as much prayer in sports, so we're losing the speech.
But anyway, I was going to ask one quick question about how to say
that it must be done before reaching enlightenment.
Is that talking just specifically if you're going to follow a Vajrayana path to enlightenment?
Because obviously in Vajrayana, depending on our practices,
you don't have a specific number of practices,
although you could say that some of those moments are involved,
but maybe not the same degree.
And as far as that also being a path to enlightenment, it doesn't include wonder.
Yeah.
I was going to say, in Vajrayana, there's three key ingredients
that are essential for becoming enlightened.
And Rinpoche has said this many times in the Buddhist path.
One, we have to remove all of our obscurations.
So all the habits we have, all the mistaken, less functional ways
of experiencing how things are. So purification.
Second, we have to reveal our goodness qualities.
Bring out these positive qualities that are naturally there,
but perhaps hidden away to some degree.
And this is a lot related with accumulating merit,
or accumulating a positive energy, revealing our natural capacities that are there.
So that's the second.
So that's purifying obscurations, accumulating merit.
And third is receiving the blessings of the wisdom lineage,
like the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and all these enlightened beings,
like through the auspicious connection and their kindness,
receiving their blessings to help see the own inherent purity
and perfection of our own awareness,
to inseparably blend with their wisdom mind.
So that's the Guryoga part.
But I think in terms of all the teachings of the Buddha
include, at least as two, purifying the obscurations
and revealing those innate goodness qualities
that every sentient being has.
And then thirdly, I think what makes Vajrayana specifically
more of a swift path is the blessing component,
the Guryoga component, which directly connects us also
to seeing the inherent purity of things.
It's called the pure relative truth,
aspect which makes Vajrayana a more swift path
to actually fulfilling that enlightenment of ourself and others.
So that's also, those are the essential points of Sutra and Tantra,
like those three points.
And then more elaborately in Namtro, it has those same points.
And there's also, you know, of course,
it's kind of just reaffirming what we've heard again and again
and need to know if we don't.
But just how Vajrayana Buddhism is based on Mahayana,
which is based on Hinayana,
like it's not a completely separate system.
They're all integrated and rely on each other as a whole system.
So this is Tibetan Buddhism, is Vajrayana Buddhism,
but that doesn't mean it's somehow separate from all the rest of the Buddhist teachings.
In fact, it's like the whole package, all of the Buddhist teachings,
which are based on Mahayana and Hinayana.
And like, you know, Rinpoche said in this beautiful, you know,
retreat we just completed as well as so many other times,
how even within the Namtro, you know, the four thoughts,
you know, how that kind of relates to the Four Noble Truths,
which is the whole path, and then as well as then also, you know,
like refuge, of course, entails everything
when we're looking, coming from the perspective,
but it's especially maybe more on the foundational Buddhism or Hinayana Buddhism
and then expanding that through the Bodhichitta, you know,
which is, again, all these refuges, the gateway to all Buddhist practice,
you know, reflecting on qualities and, you know,
moving towards these beautiful qualities and abilities
and powers of the Three Jewels, you know,
and away from what's, you know, causing us problems
and towards something reliable.
And then that's this whole vast realm of practice, you know,
until we all end all beings.
And then moving forward, expanding that vision and scope and realization
and the food of the practice in the Bodhichitta meditation,
which again, that's so vital, heart, essence, you know,
and then the skillful means, you know, and accumulation of merit and wisdom,
I mean, particularly in the way that mandala practice is a really catalytic process of that.
But of course, all of our practice involves accumulating merit and wisdom
and then the purifying, like, you know,
Dhamma was mentioning with Alandrasattva
and then it's mingling our mind with the mind of the guru,
which is essentially, again, you know, this is called the Buddhist path,
but again, the real name of this book is also opening to our primordial nature,
which is the Buddhist path.
So in that sense of how the guru yoga,
that devotional aspect and receiving the blessings is.
The Bodhichitta is so vital too.
And the other way it goes before is it maybe prepares you for,
I mean, the Bodhichitta wishing well to others in practice and that, even in words,
is almost, at least it goes for me,
almost a preparation for the times when I would almost be called upon to prove
that I could do some of that, you know, in a little way.
I mean, just, I'm speaking of multiple progress I've made,
and those times I've sort of had to do something to show that I could respect,
you know, that sort of Bodhichitta intention were key points really for me
in being able to progress in a little bit in this sort of whole path.
So in a sense, in that way it went before me as well.
I might not have said those words and thought about it.
I would never have done the things like that.
And the way I did it, and I kind of did it the way I did it because,
"Oh, well, the lineage wants me, I said I would do it.
The lineage wants me to do it."
I sort of did it blindly, and then it wasn't as easy as I thought it was going to be.
But having actually done even a little thing,
it really was key to the Guryoka all the way up to make enormous differences
along the whole thing.
So it's really clear to me how important these are.
They've only been in Mi'kmaq tradition. They really are together.
So strong. So strong.
Should we move? I think we only have about 10 minutes.
Yeah, we do.
Do you want me to read the second point?
I'll do the summary real quick first, and then that can be great.
Sure, sure.
So it's a quick summary. It's just the last two paragraphs of the chapter.
This is page 78, I think.
The first begins, "At the end of every Nandara session,
you should dedicate the merit and the positive energy of the practice
to remove the suffering of all beings
and also that all beings will attain the perfect happiness of enlightenment.
And then also during every Nandara session,
you should meditate on the true nature of mind
by releasing all grasping.
In this formless meditation, an absolute truth
should definitely be done after vajra safa and guru yoga practices
if you don't have time to do it after each of the other components of the Nandara."
Then the final paragraph, Rinpoche, concludes saying that
"Shyamata concentration practice and Vipassana insight practice
are always part of Vajrayana visualization practice."
And the quote is going to go over this more.
"Concentrating on the visualization while recognizing its empty nature
and the emptiness nature of your own mind
is the union of Shyamata and Vipassana.
And since guru yoga also includes the practice of pure perception
and the recognition of the primordial wisdom of one's own mind
and of all experiences,
it is more extensive than Shyamata and Vipassana."
This guru yoga practice includes Shyamata and Vipassana
and then adds that pure perception of the Vajrayana component as well.
On page 78 of the last paragraph, it says
"The stability of Shyamata and a higher seeing of Vipassana
are also part of the Vajrayana visualization practices.
When you visualize guru Vipassana Sambhava and concentrate on his image,
that is a form of Shyamata meditation.
At the end of the session, when you dissolve the image of Vipassana Sambhava
and meditate on the emptiness nature, that is a form of Vipassana practice.
Since guru yoga includes the practice of pure perception
and the recognition of primordial wisdom,
it is more extensive than Shyamata or Vipassana.
The discovery of pure perception, free from clinging and duality,
comes from seeing guru Padmasambhava's wisdom line,
reflecting in all directions.
Guru yoga practice makes it possible
to discover and experience everything as a radiant display of primordial wisdom."
So, wow, that's beautiful, that's beautiful.
Which I guess, I mean, just from this,
that really seems like a reason why I know Kimbo,
lots of times we're doing accumulations.
He refers to guru yogas doing it first.
Sometimes I don't know if that's always, but...
He said that's how Kenshin Palanir which he always taught him.
Wow, wow.
Oh, right, beginning by doing a certain number
to really get that guru yoga part settled.
Yeah, yeah, restoring the accumulations.
Yeah, but, yeah, it just seems so beautiful.
I mean, so, that's very, wow.
Yeah, I have to find something.
Just got something there, thanks.
I'm sure you're inducing that.
Yeah, I know, I might have to read it again.
So, Chakra, is that kind of like how you were saying before
that you can use the guru yoga part
to identify with the Vajrayana view
and bring that as a swift path
because you can identify with the instead of maybe the Hinayana,
which often focuses maybe a little bit more on relative truth as being suffering
and then identifying instead of like the the kind of already enlightened view.
It's, you know, already, it's your pure perception of primordial wisdom is displayed.
Maybe that's part of what you're saying, like why it's a swift or path
because you have that aspect that you can concentrate on from the beginning
where they bring in your practice from that perspective.
You can, that's saturating practice from the beginning.
Yeah, I think, I mean, definitely the Kemperumiches say that.
And I mean, even in the final line,
it says, "Guru yoga practice makes it possible to discover and experience
something as a radiant display of primordial wisdom."
So according to the lineage of Mipham Rinpoche
and then of course Venerable Kemperumiches,
who very closely follow that lineage,
that one of the essential points of the third turning of Buddha,
like Buddha Shakyamuni's teaching, is this pure relative truth.
We all have this Buddha nature, this primordial nature,
and that when we see that nature first
and then express from that recognition,
we're seeing forms and sounds as being the display of that Buddha nature
that's called pure perception or devotion,
which is more or less a distinctive feature of Vajrayana practice in that way.
All the Buddhist teachings include devotion and seeing the goodness.
But Vajrayana specifically recognizes that that's an inherent quality
of the nature of all sentient beings' minds.
And then it utilizes different meditation techniques
to engage one's body, one's speech, one's mind,
to recognize the purity of each of those three aspects
with a practice when comprehensively bringing them all together
at once in a single meditation practice or in a single instant.
And that's part of the swiftness of the Vajrayana.
So it goes to that pure relative truth.
And then the guru yoga also reveals the absolute truth,
the pure, stainless, non-conceptual wisdom nature of one's own mind.
And that's all experiences, so you have pure relative truth
and inseparable with absolute truth.
And then you have the full Vajrayana view.
Or you could say the same way at the union of shaamata or vipassana
and the complete teachings of the Buddha Shabhmani Guru.
I think that's it.
It ties into a little bit of what we were talking before too
about how it's the shaamata and the vipassana are in all of these parts,
particularly if you actually have that time to do it in between each session,
but even what we were saying before, you know,
there's that you do the same meditation after the vajrasatva,
you do it after the guru yoga for a very good reason,
because it's like, "Okay, wake up!"
That's what you're doing this for, come on.
We have to become familiar and comfortable
with both the form aspect and the formless aspect.
If we only are comfortable when things are moving and expressive and active,
then we can get good at that, and we need to.
But if we tend to push away the quieter, being still, formless aspect,
then that's a problem, because the form and the formless are inseparable.
We have the relative and the absolute, or that's the teachings.
At the same time, if we only want to sit there and peacefully abide
and not have anything disturb us and have everything be quiet
and feel good and kind of zone out and all that,
this blank emptiness, then that's definitely not the teaching of the Buddha.
I mean, we need to see the emptiness, the flexibility of the nature,
and it flexibly arises as expression, and that can be like impure expressions,
like if we're seeing things through duality or impure expressions,
if we're not beginning with duality, but more connecting to our Buddha nature first.
But that's inner, I mean, we need to.
I mean, that's like the beauty of the creation and completion stages,
or of Shyamantan Vipashana, it tries to seamlessly, like waves,
like it arises as expression and dissolves into expressionlessness
and feel flexible with that.
Some of the things that we're saying that Nondra gives you Shyamantan Vipashana,
but there's a third element, the Nondra, the lineage, the blessings,
you know, or the light, the sort of, whatever it is,
that if you sit and just do Shyamantana and Vipashana,
you're not necessarily going to find, just sitting with yourself, something.
So it's really saying that something, it's going to take you somewhere towards something.
There's a third element there, you're doing Shyamantan Vipashana,
but there's something else that's guaranteeing sort of a level of that,
or a brightness of it, or a light in it, or this, the Nondra itself, you know,
Nondra itself as a lineage teaching.
It's the extra piece, you've got three pieces, not just Shyamantan Vipashana, which are wonderful.
Which are very wonderful, I mean that's the essential teaching to the Sutra Mahayana,
so bodhicitta done with Shyamantan Vipashana.
Definitely taught at least in full enlightenment, unsurpassable enlightenment,
but it takes three countless eons.
So then adding in that extra part of the pure perception, or the devotion component,
or mingling with the wisdom blessings of the lineage,
and seeing one's own nature that way too.
It goes from instead of going out with a crusty dualistic mind,
and like whittling away and revealing the inner good Buddha nature,
it goes right into the Buddha nature with the guru yoga of blessings,
and then have the goodness reveal from that, like it's already fully accomplished,
and then to more and more flexibly see that.
It goes before you, like a good attendant that will get you further along.
Which I think is why Guru Yoga is taught to our mind number, which is first.
If he gets Padmasabhava, he embodies that.
You know, I know I'm talking to Trump on Crazy Wisdom, he talks about that as far as,
instead of going inside, from the outside, coming outside from the inside.
It's like Padmasabhava, he was born enlightened.
I don't know, I thought of that in the end, so it just makes sense to have that devotion.
He can show us, you know, for whatever it is in our heart.
And like the Reliant, you know they say the Four Reliances sometimes too,
but also they say in relation to the teacher, don't rely just on the form, rely on the teachings,
and rely on the teacher's wisdom minds.
Otherwise you could get caught up in thinking that Padmasabhava
has a little vulture cap, and like this, and a kapvaga, and that's what Padmasabhava is, you know.
Which Rinpoche said that really strongly before.
"Oh, you think this is Padmasabhava?"
They pointed to the picture of Padmasabhava in the gopa.
"This is a symbol of Padmasabhava."
Padmasabhava could be a peer as anything, especially the nature of your own mind.
So the teacher, I think that's a good point too.
The teacher is the Buddha appearing in human form.
Not just human, you know.
And the Guru Yoga really helps us connect with that fact that it's not something,
enlightenment is not outside of ourselves.
It never will be, never was, never has been for anyone who attended.
So through the blessings of that embodied enlightenment that we have,
we're blessed with the example through our teachers who hold the teachings
and the realization, you know, the Dharma of realization.
Not just scripture, but also the realization.
And then we emerge with them.
We see that our mind is the same as their mind, you know.
And their blessings penetrate us.
And we no longer see the teacher as just external, you know,
this person and from this culture, you know.
So beautiful.
So then you really see the teacher, not just as an ordinary form, you know.
It's more of a wisdom-minded teacher, the more comfortable you are
just with the person, the teacher too.
It all goes together.
It's sort of more tender and more, you know,
just sort of easy-going with the actual person.
That's sort of what the teaching is about in Cheetah,
with each other as well, you know.
The more we've managed to get sort of easy-going and just like,
it's comfortable with each other.
I know you know a lot even though you're so quiet.
[laughter]
The grace of your quietness.
The more that too shows that somehow we also sort of have an access
to a more wisdom-minded, you know, that all those levels go together
and comfort with them all.
Being natural.
A little bit.
Yeah, definitely. That's what we're doing.
All of that?
Now we can get all of that.
Do the new drill.
[laughter]
And again, like so many of the chapters, we really need to conclude now,
but this is why it's only two pages, but this is so rich.
Like even we just kind of scratched the surface.
Of course, and again, that's what's so beautiful about all these teachings
is we reflect on them again and again and again and again.
It's really not the final word until we've practiced and absorbed and realized.
But maybe we'll just dedicate the merit for now.
Let me just sit for a moment.
[singing]
By this merit, may all obtain omissions.
May it defeat the enemy wrongdoing.
From the stormy waves of earth all day, sickness and death.
From the oceans of sorrow, may I free all beings.
The precious bodhicitta, and those without it, may it be generated.
And those who have it, may it never diminish, but always continue increasing.